=head1 NAME

resticbackup - Restic with hooks.


=head1 USAGE

resticbackup ACTION

=head1 DESCRIPTION

When invoked as C<resticbackup foo>, resticbackup will

=over 4

=item *

Run each C<*.pre> hook. See L</HOOKS> for details.

=item *

Look up C<$RESTICBACKUP_FOO> in the config. See L</CONFIGURATION> for details.

=item *

Run C<restic $RESTICBACKUP_FOO>.

=item *

Run each C<*.post> hook. See L</HOOKS> for details.

=back

Invoking resticbackup as C<resticbackup_foo> or C<restic_foo>
with no other arguments
is equivalent to invoking it as C<resticbackup foo>.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

The location of the configuration directory
varies depending on how resticbackup was installed.
Usually it is found at C</etc/resticbackup.d> or C</usr/local/etc/resticbackup.d> .

The file named C<config> within this directory is the config file.
The format of this file is bash shell.
Config options are set as shell variables,
e.g. C<OPTION=value>.
Options that are not use the environment variable of the same name,
or a default if no such environment variable is defined.
Values that contain whitespace must be quoted,
e.g. C<OPTION="my value"> or C<OPTION='my value'>.
Other shell expansion rules apply.
See L<bash/Parameters> for details.

Each config option is described below.

B<RESTIC_PASSWORD_FILE>,
B<RESTIC_PASSWORD_COMMAND>,
B<RESTIC_REPOSITORY>,
B<RESTIC_REPOSITORY_FILE>,
etc.

=over 4

Config options are exported to restic's environment,
so all of restic's environment variables are valid config options.
See
L<https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/040_backup.html#environment-variables>
for details.

=back

B<LOG_FILE>

=over 4

Controls logging behavior.
Use '-' to log to stdout,
'syslog' to log to syslog (requires logger),
or a filename to log to a file.

Default: -

=back

B<RESTICBACKUP_*>

=over 4

Each config option that starts with C<RESTICBACKUP_>
defines an action that can be invoked from the command line.
The action's name is derived from the option name by removing C<RESTICBACKUP_>
and converting to lowercase.
When invoking an action, the option's value is passed as arguments to restic.

For example, C<RESTICBACKUP_FOO="snapshots -v"> will cause C<resticbackup foo>
to run C<restic snapshots -v> .

=back

B<Hook Options>

Hooks may have their own custom options.
See L<HOOKS> for details.

=head1 HOOKS

In the same folder as the config file,
there is a C<hooks> directory
where you can place hooks to run before or after the restic command.
A hook is any executable that ends in C<.pre> or C<.post> .
C<resticbackup> will run C<*.pre> hooks before running restic,
and C<*.post> hooks afterward.

Pre hooks are passed two arguments:
the status code of the last pre hook that failed
(or C<0> if no hooks failed),
and the action about to be performed
(e.g. for C<resticbackup backup>, the action is C<backup>).
If any pre hook fails,
resticbackup will exit without running the restic command.

Post hooks are also passed two arguments:
the status code of the restic command that was run,
and the action that was performed.

Each hook runs in a modified environment
that includes the options set in the config file.

Several example hooks are provided with resticbackup.
Their behavior and configuration options are described below.

B<check-integ.post>

=over 4

Does an integrity check when running C<resticbackup prune>.
The result of the check is written to a spool file in the same format as
L<Check MK local checks|https://docs.checkmk.com/latest/en/localchecks.html>.

The config option
controls the path to the spool file.

Options:

=over 4

=item *

C<CHECKMK_INTEGRITY_SPOOL=/path>: The path to the spool file

=back

=back

B<check-snaps.post>

=over 4

Checks that the number of snapshots taken recently is above some threshold.
The result of the check is written to a spool file in the same format as
L<Check MK local checks|https://docs.checkmk.com/latest/en/localchecks.html>.

Options:

=over 4

=item *

C<CHECKMK_SNAPSHOTS_SPOOL=/path>: The path to the spool file

=item *

C<CHECKMK_SNAPSHOTS_THRESHOLDS=period:num_crit:num_warn>: The period of time to check, the warning threshold, and te critical threshold (e.g. C<1day:6:10>)

=back

=back

C<repo-mounted.pre>

=over 4

Checks to make sure that C<$RESTIC_REPOSITORY> is mounted before taking a backup.

=back

C<z-init-repo.pre>

=over 4

Initializes the repo if it hasn't yet been initialized.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

In order to use resticbackup,
you will likely need to define a password and repository in the config file
(usually located at C</etc/resticbackup.d> or C</usr/local/etc/resticbackup.d>).

	RESTIC_PASSWORD_FILE=/etc/resticbackup.d/password
	RESTIC_REPOSITORY=/backup/restic

You will also need to make sure that any custom actions are configured.
There are two example actions in the default config:

	RESTICBACKUP_BACKUP="backup -v --exclude-file=/etc/resticbackup.d/exclude /"
	RESTICBACKUP_PRUNE="forget --prune --keep-hourly 12 --keep-daily 7 --keep-weekly 4 --keep-monthly 3"

These settings will run the appropriate restic subcommands
when invoking C<resticbackup backup> and C<resticbackup prune>.

You can configure resticbackup to run any restic command in this way.
E.g. if you were to add the following setting,
C<resticbackup snap> would run C<restic snapshots>

	RESTICBACKUP_SNAP=snapshots

You can use symlinks to run restic commands
without passing any arguments to resticbackup.
For example, to run C<resticbackup backup> daily and C<resticbackup prune> weekly
(assumes that cron is correctly configured)

	ln -s `which resticbackup` /etc/cron.daily/restic_backup
	ln -s `which resticbackup` /etc/cron.daily/resticbackup_prune

In the same folder as the config file,
there is a C<hooks> directory
where you can place executable hooks to run before or after the restic command.
Several example hooks are provided that implement the following features:

=over 4

=item *

Check to make sure a repository is mounted before taking a backup

=item *

Initialize the repo if it hasn't yet been initialized

=item *

Do an integrity check after pruning the repository

=item *

Check that the number of snapshots taken recently is above some threshold

=back

Some of these hooks have additional configuration settings in the config file.
To use a hook, remove its C<.disabled> extension.

=head1 AUTHORS

resticbackup was written by L<DMBuce|https://github.com/DMBuce> .

=head1 DISTRIBUTION

The latest version of resticbackup can be downloaded from
https://github.com/DMBuce/resticbackup .

